PRELIMINARY DISEASE PROGNOSIS USING THE BERT MODEL
In delivering quality healthcare, the timely detection of diseases is a critical factor in determining survival. As the world recovers from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic where lockdown measures and health resources were reallocated to manage the crisis, the public healthcare system now appears to be strained. This has given rise to longer wait times in accessing healthcare in many countries. According to the British Medical Association February 2024 report, with a waiting list of 7.54 million cases, the median waiting time for treatment is 14.8 weeks almost doubles the pre-COVID median of 7.5 weeks in February 2020 [1]. Similarly, in developing economies like Nigeria with a population of conservatively 200 million has communicable and infectious diseases as its major health challenge. The Public Secondary Care hospitals are usually overcrowded as it operates a broken primary healthcare system that is not efficient. There are about 27 doctors to 100000 persons, and it is no coincidence that the country records high mortality rates of some for many diseases [2]. These are not just numbers; they represent people, and it is worrisome.
	Perhaps, a fully integrated AI driven healthcare system could help in reducing these numbers by enhancing the diagnostic process, optimizing treatment pathways, and ultimately improving patient outcomes. One of the most transformative advancements in AI that has proven instrumental in various domains, including natural language processing (NLP), is the Google developed Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT).  The model can understand the context of words in text in a way that is far superior to prior models [3]. 
	Preliminary disease prognosis using the BERT model involves developing predictive models that can interpret complex clinical narratives and extract meaningful insights that aid in early diagnosis and personalized treatment planning. By fine-tuning BERT on transcribed patients’ symptom complaints, the model can be adapted to recognise medical terminology, understand symptom relationships, and suggest possible medical conditions with remarkable accuracy.
	This study aims to explore the practical implementation of the BERT model in preliminary disease prognosis and its broader implications for telemedicine and emergency response systems thereby highlighting how AI can transform patient care and operational efficiency in healthcare settings.
